The B2G User Interface

Physical Description

The Top

   The eight, rectangular, concave keys (in two groups of four) near the back of the top comprise a standard, eight-dot, braille keyboard. The four on the left, from left to right, are dots 7, 3, 2, and 1. The four on the right, from left to right, are dots 4, 5, 6, and 8.
     * The Dot7 key is often referred to as the Backspace key.
     * The Dot8 key is often referred to as the Enter key.

   The square pad with a small, round button in the middle, in between the Dot1 and Dot4 keys, is the five-key D-Pad (directional pad). Its four edges are the Up, Down, Left, and Right keys. The button in the middle is the Center key.

   The long, rectangular key in front of the Dot1 key, the D-Pad, and the Dot4 key is the Space key (or bar).

   The braille display (20 eight-dot cells) is at the front of the top. There's a small, round button just behind each cell - these are the cursor routing keys. The convex, square button to the left of the cursor routing keys is the Backward key, and the one to their right is the Forward key.

The Front

   Two internal speakers (for the left and right stereo channels) are, correspondingly, at the left and right ends of the front.

   The internal microphone is just behind a very small slit in the middle of the front.

The Left Side

   The earphone/microphone jack (3.5mm) is near the front of the left side. Standard cell phone earphones can be used.

   The video jack (RCA) is in the middle of the left side. It's for an external video monitor. This provides an easy way for a sighted person, e.g. a teacher, to offer direct assistance.

   A standard USB-A (or host) port is near the back of the left side. USB devices (memory stick, external keyboard, mouse, Ethernet adapter, hub, etc) can be connected to it. Devices that draw power from the port will drain the battery so using a powered hub, when possible, should be considered.

The Right Side

   The volume controls are the two, small, round buttons near the front of the right side. The one toward the front is the Volume Down key, and the one toward the back is the Volume Up key. These keys, when pressed on their own, adjust the volume of the current Android audio stream.

The Power Switch

   The Power switch is the slide switch near the back of the right side. It's off position is toward the front, and its on position is toward the back.

   If the system is shut down, then:
     * Switching it on boots the device. You should hear one short beep. If, instead, you hear three short beeps then the battery is too low and the device won't boot. In this case, switch it back off, and then charge the battery for a while before trying again.
     * Switching it on while holding VolumeDown boots the device into Recovery Mode.

   If the system is running, then:
     * Switching it off puts the system to sleep.
     * Switching it on wakes the system up.

   When the system is either booted or woken up, the following settings are reset to their default values:
     * The input mode is set to Text (see Input Modes).
     * One Hand Mode is disabled (see One Hand Mode).
     * The braille display is enabled (see Disabling the Display).

The Back

   The SD card slot is the long slot in the middle of the back.

   A micro USB-B (or device) port is near the left end of the back. It's primary use is for charging the battery. The battery can be charged from a computer's USB port.

The Bottom

   The camera's lens is the small circle on the bottom that's about 2cm (3/4 of an inch) in from the middle of the right side. The rectangular window that's just a little further in is where the flash LEDs are.

The Reset Button

   The Reset button is hidden within a very small, round hole on the bottom. If the device is turned over, front to back, the hole is at about the eight o'clock position relative to, and very close to, the foot nearest to the Power switch. A thin, round object, like a pin or paperclip, is needed.

   Try to keep the object you're using as perpendicular to the bottom as you can. You only need to press gently. If it feels like you're pressing against a hard surface then you've missed the button. You should feel a soft click. You should also hear a long, high-pitched beep.

The Removable Cover

   There's a removable, rectangular, plastic cover in the middle of the bottom. To remove it:
    1. Turn the device over so that its bottom is on top.
    2. Press gently down on the cover, and then slide it toward the side where the Power switch is.
    3. Lift the end of the cover that's toward the side where the earphone jack is.

   Be careful after you've removed the cover because the underside of a circuit board will be exposed. Removing the cover is how to gain access to the following:
     * The Micro-SIM card slot is in the corner that's toward the front and toward the side where the Power switch is. To gain access to the actual slot, slide its cover slightly toward the front and then lift the end of it that's toward the back. As with most SIM card slot covers, its hinge is fragile so be gentle.
     * The Serial Port is in the corner that's toward the back and toward the side where the Power switch is. It's a 10-pin (2x5) male connector that can be used by the B2G developers to perform low-level system maintenance.

Introduction

Key Combinations

   A key combination may include any number of keys (including just one). There's only one restriction regarding which keys may be used to form a key combination, namely that only one cursor routing key may be used at a time. If more than one cursor routing key is pressed at the same time, then the first one that was pressed is used.

   If any of the keys of a combination is released before the long press timeout (see Long Press Mode) expires then the action bound to that combination is executed. If the timeout expires then the action is immediately executed even though none of the keys has been released yet.

   The way to cancel a key combination that's been accidentally started is to press enough additional keys such that an unbound key combination is being attempted. A key combination that's been formally defined for this purpose is all eight dots plus Space.

Long Press Mode

   A secondary action may be bound to a key combination. A key combination's secondary action is executed if all of its keys are held until the long press timeout expires. The long press timeout is half a second.

   This mode is enabled by default. Pressing Forward+Dot6 enables it, and pressing Backward+Dot3 disables it.

One Hand Mode

   One Hand Mode is primarily for those users who only have the use of one hand. When it's on, each key of a key combination may be pressed separately. Pressing Space indicates that all of the keys of the combination have been pressed. If Space itself is part of the combination then it must be pressed first.

   For those whose operable hand is sufficiently functional, pressing more than one key at a time is supported. The only exception to this is that Space, whether pressed at the start (to include it in the combination) or at the end (to indicate that the combination is complete), should always be pressed separately.

   This mode is disabled by default. Pressing Forward+Dot8 enables it, and pressing Backward+Dot7 (followed, of course, by pressing Space) disables it. Both of these key combinations have been chosen so that they can be reasonably easily pressed with a single hand.

   Switching the Power switch off and then back on automatically disables One Hand Mode. This provides an intuitive way for a user who has accidentally enabled this mode, and who may not know how to disable it, to easily revert the keyboard to normal operation.

   Another (legacy) way to enable One Hand Mode is to hold Dot8 while switching the power on.

Typing

Input Modes

   Space+i (dots 24) displays a message (see Messages) that confirms which input mode is currently being used.

   Text mode is the default, and is used for Directly Typing Regular Text.

   Braille mode is used for Directly Typing Unicode Braille Characters.

   Either booting the device or waking it up (see The Power Switch) automatically resets the input mode to Text.

Directly Typing Regular Text

   Space+Dot7+i (dots 24) restores the input mode to Text (the default).

   In this input mode, any character that has a defined braille representation (see Braille Character Map) can be directly typed by pressing the corresponding keys as a single combination. There are two exceptions to this simple (and obvious) rule.

   If the defined representation of a character is either just dot 7 or just dot 8 then it can't be typed by pressing the corresponding key because those keys are, respectively, Backspace and Enter. Press Space+Dot7 for just dot 7, and press Space+Dot8 for just dot 8.

Directly Typing Unicode Braille Characters

   Space+Dot8+i (dots 24) sets the input mode to Braille.

   In this input mode, the characters that render in text as actual braille cells (see Unicode Braille Characters) can be directly typed by pressing the corresponding keys as a single combination.

   Two of these characters can't be typed by pressing the corresponding keys - just dot 7 (because it's the Backspace key), and just dot 8 (because it's the Enter key). Press Space+Dot7 for just dot 7, and press Space+Dot8 for just dot 8.

   These characters have several uses, including (but not limited to):
     * Actual braille characters can be written into text documents.
     * Contracted braille can be accurately saved.
     * Braille music can be accurately saved, and also shared with others who use different localized braille character mappings.

Typing a Control Character

   In order to type a control character, press Space+x (dots 1346) immediately before the letter or special symbol that represents it (see ASCII Control Characters). For example, in order to type a tab (which happens to be control I), press Space+x and then immediately type the letter i.

   The letter or special symbol must be typed within five seconds.

Indirectly Typing Any Character

   Any character can always be indirectly typed, even if directly typing it isn't possible:
     * Its braille representation hasn't been defined.
     * You don't know its braille representation.
     * It's represented in braille by either just dot 7 (the Backspace key) or just dot 8 (the Enter key).

   In order to indirectly type it, press Space+u (dots 136). This brings up a prompt (see Prompts) with the following header:
Unicode> U+

   U+ is the conventional prefix for the hexadecimal value of a Unicode character. The prompt allows you to enter up to four hexadecimal digits - 0 through 9 and A through F (either upper or lower case). Leading zeroes may be omitted. The Unicode values of characters are, of course, beyond the scope of this document.

   The digits you enter may be freely edited, e.g. the cursor can be moved, any digit may be deleted, a new digit may be inserted, etc. In other words, making corrections doesn't require backspacing and retyping. When you're done, press Enter.

   If no digits have been entered yet (or if they've all been deleted) then you'll only see the header. If, however, at least one digit has been entered then the character represented (so far) by the digit(s) is displayed just to the right, and that character's formal name is displayed on the next line.

   To illustrate, let's see how a lowercase s would be indirectly typed. It's Unicode value is U+0073. In order to keep this example simple, let's skip the two leading zeroes.

   Indirectly Typing the Letter s (U+0073)
    1. Press Space+u (dots 136):
Unicode> U+

    2. Type the digit 7 (dots 2356):
Unicode> U+7 ⣛
bell

    3. Type the digit 3 (dots 25):
Unicode> U+73 ⠎
latin small letter s

    4. Press Enter. The prompt goes away, and the s is typed.

Braille Rendering

Characters

   The basic characters are rendered using the North American Braille Computer Code. Internally-designed representations for Additional Common Symbols, as well as for Additional Characters for Spanish, have also been defined.

   If the braille representation for a complex character (e.g. a letter with an accent) hasn't been defined, then its base character (e.g. just the latter) is displayed (unless, of course, even the base character's representation hasn't been defined).

   The characters that render in text as actual braille cells (see Unicode Braille Characters) needn't (and, in fact, shouldn't) be defined. They're always rendered in braille as themselves.

   The special character rendered as dots 3, 6, 7, and 8 (⣤) is used to represent a character that doesn't have a defined representation.

Identifying an Unrecognized Character

   If you encounter a character that you don't recognize, then you can find out what it is by holding Dot7 while pressing the cursor routing key behind that character. This will cause a description of the character to be presented within a popup (see Popups). For example, the description for the letter s is:
latin small letter s
Code Point: U+0073
Block: basic latin
Category: lowercase letter
Directionality: left to right

Special Symbols

   When within an input area (see Input Areas):
     * The character where the cursor is is highlighted by dots 7 and 8 (⣀). This is its default representation. It can be changed via The Settings Screen.
     * Each of the currently selected characters is highlighted by dot 8 (⢀). This is its default representation. It can be changed via The Settings Screen.

   Note that the cursor isn't shown when at least one character has been selected (see Selecting Text). This is because editing actions are then performed on all of the selected characters as a single unit rather than at the cursor's location.

   If a screen element (list, group of pages, etc) needs to be scrolled, then:
     * Scrolling forward (down or to the right) is indicated via dots 15,38,76,24 (⠑⢄⡠⠊).
     * Scrolling backward (up or to the left) is indicated via dots 76,24,15,38 (⡠⠊⠑⢄).

Descriptive Annotations

   A checkbox is rendered as either a space (meaning unchecked) or an X (meaning checked) enclosed within [brackets], followed by its label. For example:
[ ] This box is not checked.
[X] This box is checked.

   A switch is rendered as though it were a checkbox. The box is checked if the switch is in its on position, and unchecked if it's in its off position. For example:
[ ] Off
[X] On

   If a screen element has no text of its own but its developer has provided a textual description of it, then that description, enclosed within [brackets], is displayed. For example:
[More options]
[Navigate up]

   If meaningful text for a screen element can't be found then it is rendered as its widget type enclosed within {braces}. For example:
{ImageButton}
{SeekBar}

   If a control isn't enabled then the word disabled, enclosed within (parentheses), is appended to its descriptive text. For example:
OK (disabled)

   When an action is performed that's neither implicitly confirmed (by an expected change on the braille display) nor explicitly confirmed (by a sound) then it's confirmed by a message (see Messages). For example:
One Hand On
Long Press Off

Braille-only Dialogs

   A number of braille-only dialogs are used in order to directly communicate to or interact with the user. They don't appear on an external video monitor.

Messages

   Messages are used to give feedback to the user for significant events. These include (but aren't limited to):
     * The successful changing of a setting.
     * The timeout of a partially entered request, e.g. the control modifier has been pressed but the (then required) letter or special symbol hasn't been typed quickly enough (see Typing a Control Character).

   A message is a single-line, read-only dialog. No navigation may be performed within it. It remains on the braille display for two seconds.

Popups

   Popups are used to present user-requested data as well as important system information. This includes (but isn't limited to):
     * The arrival of an Android notification.
     * The description of a character (see Identifying an Unrecognized Character).
     * The values of various status indicators (see Checking Status Indicators).

   A popup is a multi-line, read-only dialog. Normal navigation may be performed within it. Dismiss it by pressing Enter. It's automatically dismissed if no navigation operations have been performed within it for 30 seconds.

Prompts

   Prompts are used to request information from the user. This includes (but isn't limited to):
     * Requesting the value of a Unicode character (see Indirectly Typing Any Character).
     * Requesting the text to search for within the current screen element (see Finding Text within the Current Screen Element).

   A prompt is a read-write dialog. Normal navigation and editing may be performed within its response area. Press Enter once the requested information has been entered.

   The prompt's header and response area are always on the first line. The B2G User Interface may add helpful information to the rest of the first line and/or to additional lines.

   The response to a prompt is remembered. The response area of a prompt is initially empty, but, from then on, it's initialized to the previous response entered for that prompt. The remembered response is selected (see Selecting Text) so that it can be easily replaced.

Additional Features

Shortcuts

To Useful Android Screens

   The following shortcuts to useful Android screens are provided:

   Space+p (dots 1234)
          Go to the Power Off screen.

   Space+? (dots 1456)
          Go to the currently registered assist app. The default is Google Now.

   Space+s (dots 234)
          Go to a Settings screen. Another key combination must be pressed within five seconds in order to specify which Settings screen to go to:

        Space
                Go to the main Settings screen.

        a (dot 1)
                Go to the Accessibility Settings screen.

        b (dots 12)
                Go to the Bluetooth Settings screen.

        w (dots 2456)
                Go to the Wi-Fi Settings screen.

To Other B2G Applications

   The following shortcuts to other B2G applications are provided:

   Space+ed (dots 1246)
          Go to the B2G editor.

   Describing how any of these applications work is, of course, beyond the scope of this document.

Reading This Document

   A copy of this document is available in plain text on the B2G. Press Space+h (dots 125) to access it. See Finding Text within the Current Screen Element for tips on how to find your way around within it.

Checking the Time

   You can access a braille-friendly clock by pressing Space+t (dots 2345). The date and time are displayed on the first line using the conventional international format. The second line contains the abbreviated week day and month names, and the third line identifies the time zone. For example:
2012-02-29 10:26:53
Wed, Feb 29
EST (-0500)

   The four-digit number within (parentheses) on the third line is the time zone's offset, in (two-digit) hours and (two-digit) minutes, from UTC (Universal Coordinated Time). The abbreviation EST means Eastern Standard Time in North America, which is five hours earlier (hence the leading minus sign) than UTC.

Checking Status Indicators

   You can check various helpful status indicators by pressing Backward and Forward together. This will cause the indicators to be presented within a popup (see Popups) that looks something like this:
Battery: 78% charging USB
Wi-Fi: MyNetwork 60% 54Mbps

Identifying the Build

   There may be times when you need to identify the exact build of the B2G User Interface that you're currently using. For example, this information is particularly helpful when you're reporting a problem or checking if there's a newer version.

   You can get this information by pressing Space, Backward, and Forward together. This will cause details that identify the build to be presented within a screen that looks something like this:
UI Build Revision   1797952
UI Build Time       2015-09-30@14:04 UTC
Android Build Name  v4.1.2
Firmware Version    3.0

Speech

   Speech is supported. It's enabled by default. Pressing Space+VolumeUp enables it, and pressing Space+VolumeDown disables it. Another (legacy) way to disable it is to press VolumeDown and VolumeUp together.
     * To interrupt what's currently being spoken, press Backward+VolumeDown.
     * To speak the current line, press Backward+VolumeUp. Another (legacy) way to do so is to press Space+c (dots 14).

   Adjusting the Volume:

          + Press Dot1+VolumeDown for softer.
          + Press Dot1+VolumeUp for louder.

          The speech volume is set relative to the system volume. If, therefore, the speech volume is set as high as it'll go but still sounds too soft then try increasing the system volume (by pressing VolumeUp by itself).

   Adjusting the Rate:

          + Press Dot2+VolumeDown for slower.
          + Press Dot2+VolumeUp for faster.

   Adjusting the Pitch:

          + Press Dot3+VolumeDown for lower.
          + Press Dot3+VolumeUp for higher.

   Adjusting the Balance:

          + Press Dot4+VolumeDown for more left.
          + Press Dot4+VolumeUp for more right.

Sleep Talk Mode

   Sleep Talk Mode leaves speech active while the Power switch is off. This capability is useful when, for example, you'd like to reduce battery drain but still be informed when an important asynchronous event, e.g. the arrival of a notification, occurs.

   This mode is disabled by default. Pressing Forward+VolumeUp enables it, and pressing Forward+VolumeDown disables it.

Differences from Braille Rendering

   Speech is rendered differently than braille is in the following ways:
     * The [brackets] around screen element descriptions provided by application developers aren't spoken.
     * The {braces} around screen element types aren't spoken.
     * A space is inserted in between each pair of a lowercase letter followed by an uppercase letter within screen element types in order to improve the way that each implied word is pronounced. For example, SeekBar is spoken as Seek Bar.
     * The (parentheses) around screen element states aren't spoken.
     * The state of a checkbox (or switch) is spoken as either checked or not checked.

Braille

The On-screen Monitor

   An on-screen monitor that shows what's on the braille display can be enabled from The Settings Screen. It shows both the braille cells and the text.

Adjusting the Dot Firmness

   The firmness of the braille dots can be adjusted from The Settings Screen.

Disabling the Display

   The braille display is enabled by default. It can be disabled by pressing Backward+Dot1, and reenabled by pressing Forward+Dot4.

The Settings Screen

   Pressing Space+o (dots 135) takes you to the settings screen for the B2G User Interface.

   The top line contains the following buttons:

   Save Settings
          Save the current values of the settings for later restoration. This is a good way to checkpoint the configuration that you're most comfortable with.

   Restore Settings
          Restore the setting values that were most recently saved. This is how to get back to the configuration that you're most comfortable with.

   Reset to Defaults
          Restore the setting values to an internally-defined configuration. This is how to recover if, for example, you've accidentally messed up your saved settings.

   Each subsequent line contains a setting that can be changed, and is laid out in columns as follows:
    1. This column contains the name of the setting.
    2. If it's a boolean setting then this column contains an on/off switch. If it's any other kind of setting then this column shows that setting's current value.
    3. For non-boolean settings, this column contains a button that changes the setting to its previous (lower for numeric settings) value.
    4. For non-boolean settings, this column contains a button that changes the setting to its next (higher for numeric settings) value.

General Settings

   The following settings (as of the time of this writing) are presented:

   CAPTION: General Settings

   Setting             Default Range                Previous  Next
   Input               Text    Text, Braille        Text      Braille
   Long Press          On      Off - On
   Reverse Panning     Off     Off - On
   One Hand            Off     Off - On
   Braille             On      Off - On
   Cursor Indicator    Dots78  Dots78, Dot7, Dot8   Previous  Next
   Selection Indicator Dot8    Dots78, Dot7, Dot8   Previous  Next
   Firmness            4       0 - 7                Decrease  Increase
   Monitor             Off     Off - On
   Speech              On      Off - On
   Sleep Talk          Off     Off - On
   Volume              10      0 - 10               Softer    Louder
   Balance             Center  Left100% - Right100% More Left More Right
   Rate                0       -10 - 10             Slower    Faster
   Pitch               0       -10 - 10             Lower     Higher
   Developer           Off     Off - On

Developer Settings

   If Developer Mode is enabled, then these additional settings are presented:

   CAPTION: Developer Settings

   Setting        Default Range    Previous Next
   Log Updates    Off     Off - On
   Log Keyboard   Off     Off - On
   Log Actions    Off     Off - On
   Log Navigation Off     Off - On
   Log Gestures   Off     Off - On
   Log Braille    Off     Off - On

Developer Mode

   A very intentionally difficult-to-press key combination has been defined for enabling and disabling Developer Mode:
Backward + Forward + Dot1 + Dot2 + Dot4 + Dot5

   A long press enables it, and a short press disables it. Note that this mode can't be enabled unless Long Press Mode is enabled (another accident prevention scheme).

   When this mode is enabled:
     * Additional key combinations are enabled (see Developer Operations).
     * The battery indicators line (see Checking Status Indicators) includes the battery's voltage and temperature.
     * If a component of the B2G User Interface crashes, an email containing the Java backtrace of that crash is sent to the B2G developers for analysis. The email doesn't contain any sensitive information.

Navigation

Emulating the Android Keys

   All Android devices have a number of special keys. There are two ways to emulate each of them:
     * With two hands, by pressing Space together with a related letter or special symbol. While these may be easier to remember, they're also less convenient because both hands must be removed from the display.
     * With one hand, by pressing Dot4 together with one of the D-Pad keys.

   CAPTION: Special Android Keys

        Key       Two Hand Version   One Hand Version
   Home          Space+Dots123456    Dot4+Down
   Back          Space+z (dots 1356) Dot4+Left
   Notifications Space+n (dots 1345) Dot4+Up
   Recent Apps   Space+r (dots 1235) Dot4+Right
   Menu          Space+m (dots 134)  Dot4+Center

Emulating Screen Gestures

   To tap (or click) the current screen element, press Center. Another (legacy) way to do it is to press The Enter Key.

   To hold (or long click) the current screen element, press Space+Center.

Navigating with the Forward and Backward Keys

   The easiest way to navigate the screen is to use the Forward and Backward keys because they move sequentially through all of the screen elements, including those that merely present helpful text, without missing any of them. The Forward key stops at the end of the screen, and the Backward key stops at the start of the screen.

   If the text of a screen element is longer than the braille display and/or has more than one line, then:
     * The Forward key pans to the right, wrapping to the start of the next line as needed, such that all of the text is presented. When it reaches the end of the text, it moves to the start of the next screen element.
     * The Backward key pans to the left, wrapping to the end of the previous line as needed, such that all of the text is presented. When it reaches the start of the text, it moves to the start of the previous screen element.

   Repeatedly pressing Forward, therefore, reads through all of the text on the screen because it reads through all of the text associated with the current screen element before moving to the next one. Repeatedly pressing Backward, however, pans to the left through the text associated with the current screen element, but, from then on, moves directly to the start of each successive preceding screen element.

Leaving the Current Screen Element

   The following methods may be used to force an immediate, direct move to the start of the next (or previous) screen element:
     * Press Space together with Forward (or Backward).
     * Long press Forward (or Backward). See Long Press Mode.

   One of these methods must also be used in order to leave an input area (see Input Areas).

Reverse Panning Mode

   Reverse Panning Mode is designed for those who prefer to read with their right hands while navigating with their left hands. When enabled, the Forward and Backward keys are reversed insofar as navigation is concerned:
     * Backward pans to the right, wraps to the start of the next line, moves to the next screen element, etc.
     * Forward pans to the left, wraps to the end of the previous line, moves to the previous screen element, etc.

   This mode is disabled by default. Pressing Forward+Dot5 enables it, and pressing Backward+Dot2 disables it.

Explicit Panning

   The Forward and Backward keys pan right and left by the full length of the braille display. This can make it difficult to read an indented block of related text (a column, a long word, a timestamp, etc).

   The braille display can be explicitly panned by holding Dot8 while pressing a cursor routing key. This positions the braille display such that the rendered portion of the current line starts with that character.

Navigating with the Directional Keys

   Up moves up through the lines of text for the current screen element, and, when on the top line, moves to the start of the text for the previous screen element.

   Down moves down through the lines of text for the current screen element, and, when on the bottom line, moves to the start of the text for the next screen element.

   Left pans to the left through the text for the current screen element, wrapping to the end of the previous line, and, when at the start of the text, moves to the start of the text for the previous screen element.

   Right pans to the right through the text for the current screen element, wrapping to the start of the next line, and, when at the end of the text, moves to the start of the text for the next screen element.

   Space+Up performs a scroll backward (up or left) operation.
     * If within a list then move up several elements.
     * If within a set of pages then move to the previous page.

   Space+Down performs a scroll forward (down or right) operation.
     * If within a list then move down several elements.
     * If within a set of pages then move to the next page.

   Space+Left moves to the first element of a list, to the first page of a group, etc.

   Space+Right moves to the last element of a list, to the last page of a group, etc.

   These keys act differently within some other contexts. For those details, see:
     * The Directional Keys within an Input Area
     * The Directional Keys When on a Slider

Input Areas

   The character where the cursor is is highlighted via dots 7 and 8 (⣀).

   Pressing a cursor routing key brings the cursor to that character. If text has been selected then the selection is cleared.

   An additional blank character is rendered at the end of each line within an input area. This character represents the delimiter between a line and the one that follows it.
     * Typing while the cursor is on it appends characters to the line.
     * Deleting it joins the line to the start of the next one.

   When a character is typed (see Typing), then:
     * If text hasn't been selected then the typed character is inserted just to the left of the cursor.
     * If text has been selected then the typed character replaces the selected text.

   The Enter key is Dot8. If the input area supports more than one line then this key ends the current line and starts a new one.
     * Pressing it when at the start of a line inserts an empty line just above it.
     * Pressing it when in the middle of a line splits that line just to the left of the cursor.
     * Pressing it when at the end of a line starts a new line just below it.

Deleting Characters

   The Backspace key is Dot7.
     * If text hasn't been selected then the character just to the left of the cursor is deleted. If this key is pressed when at the start of a line then that line is joined to the end of the previous one.
     * If text has been selected then the selected text is deleted.

   The Delete key is Space+d (dots 145).
     * If text hasn't been selected then the character where the cursor is is deleted. If this key is pressed when at the end of a line then that line is joined to the start of the next one.
     * If text has been selected then the selected text is deleted.

   The Forward and Backward keys pan through the input area in the expected way, but won't leave it. The Forward key pans to the right, and, at the end of each line, wraps to the start of the next one. The Backward key pans to the left, and, at the start of each line, wraps to the end of the previous one. See Leaving the Current Screen Element for how to move to another screen element.

The Directional Keys within an Input Area

   The directional keys move the cursor through the text, one step at a time. They will not leave the input area. The braille display is panned, as needed, such that the cursor is always visible.

   The Left key moves the cursor to the previous character. If it's at the start of a line then it wraps to the end of the previous line. If text has been selected then the cursor is moved to just before the first selected character, and the selection is cleared.

   The Right key moves the cursor to the next character. If it's at the end of a line then it wraps to the start of the next line. If text has been selected then the cursor is moved to just after the last selected character, and the selection is cleared.

   The Up key moves the cursor to the same position on the previous line. If that line is too short then the cursor is also moved leftward. If text has been selected then the cursor is moved to just above the first selected character, and the selection is cleared.

   The Down key moves the cursor to the same position on the next line. If that line is too short then the cursor is also moved leftward. If text has been selected then the cursor is moved to just below the last selected character, and the selection is cleared.

Selecting Text

   Each character within the current text selection is highlighted via dot 8 (⢀). If text has been selected then the cursor isn't shown.

   Selecting text is useful in at least the following ways:
     * Typing a character deletes the selected text, puts the cursor where the selected text was, and then inserts the typed character at that point. This, in other words, is an efficient way to replace old text with new text. Just select the old text, and then start typing the new text.
     * Pressing any of the delete keys (see Deleting Characters) removes all of the selected text. This, in other words, is an efficient way to delete a block of text. Just select it, and then delete it.

   A quick way to select all of the characters within the input area is to press Space+Dot8+a (dot 1).

   Any subset of the characters within the input area can be selected by following these steps:
    1. If necessary, use the Forward and Backward keys to pan to a place where the first character to be selected can be seen.
    2. Hold Backward while pressing the cursor routing key behind the character that's to start the selection.
    3. If necessary, use the Forward and Backward keys to pan to a place where the last character to be selected can be seen.
    4. Hold Forward while pressing the cursor routing key behind the character that's to end the selection.

   Steps 1 and 2 may be reperformed at any time in order to change the start of the selection. Likewise, steps 3 and 4 may be reperformed at any time in order to change the end of the selection. In fact, the end of the selection can be set before the start of the selection has been set, i.e. steps 3 and 4 may be performed before steps 1 and 2 have been performed.

   If the start of the selection is set first, and if the cursor is after that character, then the selection is implicitly extended forward to (but not including) the character where the cursor is. This, for example, provides an easy way to delete or replace several characters that have just been typed.

   If the end of the selection is set first, and if the cursor is before that character, then the selection is implicitly extended back to (and including) the character where the cursor is. This, for example, provides an easy way to replace a word, line, paragraph, etc.

Using the Clipboard

   To copy text to the clipboard, press Space+Dot8+c (dots 14). If this is done when not within an input area, or when within an input area with no selected text, then all of the text is copied. If this is done within an input area with selected text then just that text is copied.

   To copy part of the text to the clipboard when not within an input area:
    1. Move to a place where the first character is visible.
    2. Hold Backward while pressing the cursor routing key behind the first character.
    3. Move to a place where the last character is visible.
    4. Hold Forward while pressing the cursor routing key behind the last character. The text from the first character through the last character (inclusive) will be copied to the clipboard. This step will fail if:
          + The first character hasn't been set.
          + The last character is before the first character.

   Note that these same steps work somewhat differently within an input area (see Selecting Text).

   To cut text to the clipboard, press Space+Dot8+x (dots 1346). This can only be done within an input area. If text hasn't been selected then all of the text is cut. If text has been selected then just that text is cut.

   To paste text from the clipboard, press Space+Dot8+v (dots 1236). This can only be done within an input area. If text hasn't been selected then the pasted text is inserted just to the left of the cursor. If text has been selected then the pasted text replaces the selected text.

Sliders

   A slider is a control that intuitively (from a visual perspective) represents a numeric value (distance, magnitude, etc). It's often used, for example, to represent a volume control, the current position within a song, etc.

   Each time the slider is adjusted, a brief message is displayed that announces its new position (as a percentage). Unfortunately, due to a current system limitation, its current position can't be determined (without actually looking at it on the screen). It's necessary, therefore, to adjust its position back and forth in order to figure out what it is.

   Attempting to either increase a slider's position beyond its maximum or decrease its position beyond its minimum neither displays a position message nor indicates an error.

The Directional Keys When on a Slider

   A slider is normally adjusted by tapping the desired point along it's bar. This, of course, can't be done on a device that doesn't have a touch screen. Instead, use the Left and Right directional keys (on the D-Pad) to adjust it.
     * The Left key decreases its position.
     * The Right key increases its position.
     * The Up and Down keys don't do anything.

Finding Text within the Current Screen Element

   To find a sequence of words within the text that's associated with the current screen element, press Space+f (dots 124). This brings up a prompt (see Prompts) with the following header:
find>

   Enter one or more words (sequences of non-space characters) separated by spaces. The same words must occur together, in the same order, within the text. You don't need to know how many spaces are between each pair of words within the text because however many spaces you enter will match any number of spaces within the text. You also don't need to know which letters are in uppercase and which are in lowercase because the search isn't case sensitive.

   The first word you enter need only match the end of the corresponding word within the text. Likewise, the last word you enter need only match the start of the corresponding word within the text. Enter a leading space to force the first word to match an entire word. Likewise, enter a trailing space to force the last word to match an entire word.

   These same rules apply if you enter a single word. Since it's both the first and the last word, it need only match part (the start, middle, or end) of a word within the text. Enter a leading space to force it to match to start of a word, a trailing space to force it to match the end of a word, and both to force it to match an entire word.

   You can edit the word(s) that you're entering. Press Enter when you're done.

   A forward search through the text is performed. If a match is found then the braille display is repositioned to where it starts.

   The following convenience key combinations have also been defined:

   Space+Dot8+f (dots 124):
          Search forward through the text for the next match.

   Space+Dot7+f (dots 124):
          Search backward through the text for the previous match.

Following a Reference

   Since the find prompt is an input area, the current clipboard content can be pasted into it. This capability makes it fairly easy to follow a reference (see, see also, etc).

   The first step is to copy the reference to the clipboard:
    1. Move to where the start of the reference is visible.
    2. Hold Backward while pressing the cursor routing key behind its first character.
    3. Move to where the end of the reference is visible.
    4. Hold Forward while pressing the cursor routing key behind its last character.

   The second step is to search through the text for a match:
    5. Press Space+f (dots 124) to bring up the find prompt.
    6. Press Space+Dot8+v (dots 1236) to paste the reference into the response.
    7. Press Enter (dot 8) to search forward for the reference.

   The next match may, of course, be another reference rather than the referenced header. You may, therefore, need to continue searching further forward with Space+Dot8+f (dots 124), or to search backward with Space+Dot7+f (dots 124).

Navigating with Keyboard Keys

   Navigation used to be done by using real keys on an actual keyboard. This method can still be used via an external keyboard connected via Bluetooth or USB. The B2G User Interface also supports it by emulating the following keyboard keys:

   CAPTION: Special Keyboard Keys

   Keyboard Key Key Combination
   Enter        Dot8
   Cursor Left  Dot3
   Cursor Right Dot6
   Cursor Up    Dot1
   Cursor Down  Dot4
   Page Up      Dots23
   Page Down    Dots56
   Home         Dots123
   End          Dots456
   Shift+Tab    Dots12
   Tab          Dots45

   What each of these keys does is defined by Android - not by the B2G User Interface. Because of this, navigating with these keys isn't fully compatible with B2G User Interface navigation:
     * Navigating with the Forward and Backward Keys
     * Navigating with the Directional Keys

   Android keeps track of the current screen element when these keys are used, and B2G User Interface navigation can't override this. So, for each screen:
     * The first keyboard navigation operation is relative to the current screen element.
     * Any subsequent keyboard navigation operation is relative to the result of the previous keyboard navigation operation. Intervening B2G User Interface navigation operations won't be considered.
     * B2G User Interface navigation operations are always relative to the current screen element no matter which type of navigation was previously used.

The Enter Key

   Dot8
     * If on a button then press it.
     * If on a checkbox then check/uncheck it.
     * If on a switch then move it to its other position.
     * If on a folder then open it.
     * If on an app then go to it.
     * If within an input area:
          + If text has been selected then replace it with a new line character.
          + If text hasn't been selected then insert a new line character to the left of the cursor.

The Cursor Left Key

   Space+Dot3
     * If not within an input area then move to the nearest screen element that's roughly to the left of the current one. This operation is not only imprecise, but also doesn't find screen elements that merely present helpful text.
     * If within an input area:
          + If text hasn't been selected then move the cursor one character to the left. If it's at the start of a line then wrap to the end of the previous line.
          + If text has been selected then move the cursor to the first selected character and then clear the selection.

The Cursor Right Key

   Space+Dot6
     * If not within an input area then move to the nearest screen element that's roughly to the right of the current one. This operation is not only imprecise, but also doesn't find screen elements that merely present helpful text.
     * If within an input area:
          + If text hasn't been selected then move the cursor one character to the right. If it's at the end of a line then wrap to the start of the next line.
          + If text has been selected then move the cursor to the character just after it and then clear the selection.

The Cursor Up Key

   Space+Dot1
     * If not within an input area then move to the nearest screen element that's roughly above the current one. This operation is not only imprecise, but also doesn't find screen elements that merely present helpful text.
     * If within an input area:
          + If text hasn't been selected then move the cursor one line up. If it's on the top line then move to the nearest screen element that's roughly above the current one (see above). Vertical cursor motion within text may cause it to also move unexpectedly left or right in braille, especially when a proportional font has been used, because the characters on the screen may not all have the same width.
          + If text has been selected then move the cursor to the first selected character and then clear the selection.

The Cursor Down Key

   Space+Dot4
     * If not within an input area then move to the nearest screen element that's roughly below the current one. This operation is not only imprecise, but also doesn't find screen elements that merely present helpful text.
     * If within an input area:
          + If text hasn't been selected then move the cursor one line down. If it's on the bottom line then move to the nearest screen element that's roughly below the current one (see above). Vertical cursor motion within text may cause it to also move unexpectedly left or right in braille, especially when a proportional font has been used, because the characters on the screen may not all have the same width.
          + If text has been selected then move the cursor to the character just after it and then clear the selection.

The Page Up Key

   Space+Dots23

   Perform a scroll backward (up or to the left) operation.
     * If within a list then move up several elements. If the first element is already visible then move to it.
     * If within an input area then move up several lines. If the first line is already visible then move to it.
     * If within a set of pages then move to the previous page.

The Page Down Key

   Space+Dots56

   Perform a scroll forward (down or to the right) operation.
     * If within a list then move down several elements. If the last element is already visible then move to it.
     * If within an input area then move down several lines. If the last line is already visible then move to it.
     * If within a set of pages then move to the next page.

The Home Key

   Space+Dots123

   Move to the first element of a list, to the start of a line of text, to the first page of a group, etc.

The End Key

   Space+Dots456

   Move to the last element of a list, to the end of a line of text, to the last page of a group, etc.

The Shift+Tab Key

   Space+Dots12

   Move to the previous screen element that can perform an action. If on the first screen element then wrap to the last one.

The Tab Key

   Space+Dots45

   Move to the next screen element that can perform an action. If on the last screen element then wrap to the first one.

Recovery Mode

   Recovery Mode is a single-user environment within which system maintenance can be performed safely. The B2G User Interface isn't available in Recovery Mode. Braille access in Recovery Mode is provided by BRLTTY (see http://brltty.com).

   BRLTTY's key bindings for the B2G are different than those defined by the B2G User Interface. Describing them is beyond the scope of this document - please see http://brltty.com/doc/KeyBindings/brl-bg-all.html.

   Android's visual Recovery Mode menu can still be used, though braille must first be disabled. Those who prefer to use an external video monitor must press both volume keys together (VolumeDown + VolumeUp) in order to stop BRLTTY's B2G braille driver. The B2G keyboard can then be used to navigate the visual menu.

The Action Menu

   The braille menu offers the same functionality as the visual menu but in a different way because it's been designed for a text-mode environment. When it starts, it shows a list summarizing the actions that can be selected, and then presents the prompt:
action>

   To select an action, type its name and then press Enter. Unambiguous abbreviations of action names are recognized. Leading and/or trailing spaces are ignored. Entering an empty line redisplays the action summary.

The Boot Action

   This action reboots to Android. This requires User Confirmation.

The Clear Action

   This action wipes /cache (the system cache partition), and then reboots to Android. This requires User Confirmation.

The Exit Action

   This action terminates this menu. This requires User Confirmation.

   Once terminated, it's not that easy to restart the menu. This action has only been defined so that the B2G developers can easily test changes to the menu.

The Log Action

   This action uses the vi editor to view the log for the current Recovery Mode session. The edit session is read-only in order to prevent any changes from being saved (written back) to the log.

   Type :q followed by Enter to exit the edit session. If you've accidentally made any changes to the read-only edit buffer then you'll need to use :q! instead.

The Reset Action

   This action performs a factory reset, and then reboots to Android. Both /cache (the system cache partition) and /data (the user data partition) are wiped. This requires User Confirmation.

The Shell Action

   This action starts an interactive Unix-style shell. Use the shell's exit command to return to this menu.

The Update Action

   This action applies an OTA (over-the-air) update, and then reboots to Android. This requires User Confirmation.

   OTA updates are .zip files that contain special meta-data (including an electronic signature). They're used to update either the whole Android system or just parts of it. You must first choose the specific update that you'd like to apply via The File System Browser (which is automatically started for you).

The File System Browser

   The file system browser is used to look through the file system in order to find the file that's to be processed by the currently selected action. It's used, for example, by The Update Action.

   When the file system browser starts, it shows a list summarizing The Navigation Keys, and then presents The Top-Level Folder List.

   Only the current entry of the current folder is displayed. The line containing it is always rewritten, so the navigation key summary is always just above it for easy reference.

   A single-character indicator is appended to the name of the current file system entry that describes what it is. The indicators are:
   Indicator Type
   /         folder (directory)
   *         executable file
   |         FIFO (named pipe)
   =         socket
   %         character device
   $         block device
   @         symbolic link
   ?         unknown

The Top-Level Folder List

   The top-level folder list contains the volumes that can be browsed. They are:
     * /storage/sdcard1 (the removable SD card)
     * /cache (the system cache partition)
     * /data (the user data partition)

The Navigation Keys

   The following B2G keys can be used to browse the file system:

   Dot1
          Go up to the previous entry within the current folder.

   Dot4
          Go down to the next entry within the current folder.

   Dot2
          Go back to the parent folder (equivalent to .. within the visual file system browser). If within The Top-Level Folder List then exit the file system browser without choosing a file.

   Dot5
          If the current entry is a folder then go into it. If it's a file then choose it and exit the file system browser.

   Dot3
          Exit the file system browser without choosing a file.

User Confirmation

   Some actions require user confirmation. The prompt is a brief description of the action that's to be performed, followed by a question mark (?). The user's response may be:

   yes (or any abbreviation thereof)
          The action is performed.

   no (or any abbreviation thereof)
          The action is cancelled.

   anything else
          The confirmation prompt is reissued.

Booting into Recovery Mode

   There are a number of ways to boot the B2G into Recovery Mode:
     * Via the B2G User Interface:
         1. Go to The Settings Screen:
Space + o (dots 135)

         2. Ensure that Developer Mode is enabled.
         3. Go into the System Maintenance Operations menu:
Space + Dots78 + m (dots 134)

         4. Click on Recovery Mode.
     * When the B2G is fully shut down:
         1. Press and hold VolumeDown.
         2. Slide The Power Switch to its on position.
         3. Continue to hold VolumeDown until Starting appears on the braille display.
     * For developer builds (the super-user shell capability is disabled in user builds):
         1. Start an interactive shell on the B2G with the Android SDK command:
adb shell

         2. Reboot the B2G into Recovery Mode with the command:
reboot recovery

     * Via The Serial Port:
         1. Reboot the B2G into Recovery Mode with the u-boot command:
run recoverycmd

Firmware Features

Status Alerts

   A high-pitched beep (approximately 4KHz) is used to alert the user to a number of firmware-detected states.

   CAPTION: Beep Lengths

   Length Duration
   Short  100ms
   Medium 500ms
   Long   1s

   One Short Beep
          The system has started booting. This occurs immediately after the Power switch has been turned on while the system is shut down. The braille display is not powered up until later.

   Two Short Beeps
          The kernel has finished initializing. This occurs part way through the system's boot sequence. The braille display is powered up at this point. It will say Starting for a few seconds, and then go blank. Eventually, when the User Interface starts, regular screen content will appear.

   Three Short Beeps
          The battery is too low to boot the system. This check is made when the Power switch is turned on while the system is shut down.

   Two Medium Beeps
          The battery is full. This occurs when the charger is connected, and indicates that further charging is unnecessary.

   One Long Beep
          The device has been successfully reset (see The Reset Button).

   Four Long Beeps
          The system is about to reboot. This occurs after the VolumeDown+Dot4+Dot5+Dot6+Dot8 firmware key binding has been pressed.

Key Bindings

   Simultaneously pressing VolumeDown, Dot1, Dot2, Dot3, and Dot7:
          If the system is running then go to the Power Off screen. This is equivalent to a medium press of the Power button on an Android device.

   Simultaneously pressing VolumeDown, Dot4, Dot5, Dot6, and Dot8:
          If the system is running then reset the main processor and then boot the system. This is equivalent to a long press of the Power button on an Android device. You should hear four long beeps.

   Switching the power on:

     * If the system is shut down then boot it. This is equivalent to a long press of the Power button on an Android device.
     * If the system is running then wake it up. This is equivalent to a short press of the Power button on an Android device.

   Switching the power off:
          If the system is running then put it to sleep. This is equivalent to a short press of the Power button on an Android device. The system itself will stay up, but most of the peripherals (the braille display, the keyboard, etc) will be shut down in order to save power.

   Holding VolumeDown while switching the power on:
          If the system is shut down then boot into Recovery Mode. This is equivalent to a simultaneous long press of the Power button and the Volume Up key on an Android device.

Quick Reference

Braille

Special Symbols

   CAPTION: Special Braille Symbols

   Symbol Dots        Description
   ⣤      3768        undefined character
   ⣀      78          default cursor indicator
   ⢀      8           default selection indicator
   ⠑⢄⡠⠊   15,38,76,24 scrolling forward (down, right)
   ⡠⠊⠑⢄   76,24,15,38 scrolling backward (up, left)

Annotations

   CAPTION: Braille Annotations

   Annotation Description
   [ ]        an unchecked checkbox or a switch in its off position
   [X]        a checked checkbox or a switch in its on position
   [text]     a description provided by the application's developer
   {text}     the screen element's type
   (text)     the screen element's state

Key Bindings

Common Operations

   CAPTION: Common Operations

          Keys                                    Description
   Dot8                the keyboard Enter key
   Backward            pan to the left
   Forward             pan to the right
   Left                go to the previous character of editable text or part of the line
   Right               go to the next character of editable text or part of the line
   Up                  go to the previous line of text or element on the screen
   Down                go to the next line of text or element on the screen
   Space+Left          go to the beginning of a list or line
   Space+Right         go to the end of a list or line
   Space+Up            go to the previous page of a list or block of text
   Space+Down          go to the next page of a list or block of text
   Dot7+Cursor         show the description of a specific character
   Dot8+Cursor         shift the braille display a specific amount to the right
   Space+Dot8+Dots14#c copy the selected (or all) text to the clipboard
   Space+Dots24#i      show the current input mode setting
   Space+Dot7+Dots24#i set the input mode to text
   Space+Dot8+Dots24#i set the input mode to braille
   Backward+Dot1       disable braille
   Forward+Dot4        enable braille
   Backward+Dot2       disable reverse panning mode
   Forward+Dot5        enable reverse panning mode
   Backward+Dot3       disable long key press actions
   Forward+Dot6        enable long key press actions
   Backward+Dot7       disable one hand mode
   Forward+Dot8        enable one hand mode
   Backward+Forward    show important status indicators
   Space+Dots12345678  cancel an accidentally-started key combination

Input Operations

   CAPTION: Input Operations

           Keys                                   Description
   Cursor                bring the cursor to a specific character
   Dot7                  delete the character to the left of the cursor
   Space+Dots145#d       delete the character that the cursor is on
   Backward+Cursor       set or change the start of the text selection
   Forward+Cursor        set or change the end of the text selection
   Space+Dot8+Dot1#a     select all of the text
   Space+Dot8+Dots1346#x cut the selected text to the clipboard
   Space+Dot8+Dots1236#v paste the clipboard into the text
   Space+Dot7            type the character represented by just dot 7
   Space+Dot8            type the character represented by just dot 8
   Space+Dots136#u       type any character by its Unicode value
   Space+Dots1346#x      the keyboard Control key (applies to the next typed character)

Screen Operations

   CAPTION: Screen Operations

              Keys                                              Description
   Backward+LongPress         go to the start of the previous screen element
   Forward+LongPress          go to the start of the next screen element
   Backward+Space             go to the start of the previous screen element
   Forward+Space              go to the start of the next screen element
   Center                     tap (click) the current screen element
   Space+Center               hold (long click) the current screen element
   Dot4+Up                    go to the Notifications screen
   Dot4+Down                  the Android Home key
   Dot4+Left                  the Android Back key
   Dot4+Right                 go to the Recent Apps screen
   Dot4+Center                the Android Menu key
   Space+Dots1345#n           go to the Notifications screen
   Space+Dots123456           the Android Home key
   Space+Dots1356#z           the Android Back key
   Space+Dots1235#r           go to the Recent Apps screen
   Space+Dots134#m            the Android Menu key
   Space+Dots124#f            find text within the current screen element (forward search)
   Space+Dot7+Dots124#f       find the previous occurrence of the same text within the current screen element
   Space+Dot8+Dots124#f       find the next occurrence of the same text within the current screen element
   Space+Dots125#h            go to the document for the B2G User Interface
   Space+Dots135#o            go to the Settings screen of the B2G User Interface
   Space+Dots1234#p           go to the Power Off screen
   Space+Dots2345#t           go to the B2G digital clock
   Space+Dots1246#ed          go to the B2G editor
   Space+Dots1456#?           go to the current Google Assist app
   Space+Dots234#s,Space      go to the main Settings screen
   Space+Dots234#s,Dot1#a     go to the Accessibility Settings screen
   Space+Dots234#s,Dots12#b   go to the Bluetooth Settings screen
   Space+Dots234#s,Dots2456#w go to the Wi-Fi Settings screen
   Backward+Forward+Space     show details that identify the build

Speech Operations

   CAPTION: Speech Operations

          Keys                   Description
   Space+VolumeDown    disable speech
   Space+VolumeUp      enable speech
   Forward+VolumeDown  speak only when awake
   Forward+VolumeUp    speak even when asleep
   Backward+VolumeDown stop speaking
   Backward+VolumeUp   speak the current line
   Dot1+VolumeDown     decrease the speech volume
   Dot1+VolumeUp       increase the speech volume
   Dot2+VolumeDown     decrease the speech rate
   Dot2+VolumeUp       increase the speech rate
   Dot3+VolumeDown     decrease the speech pitch
   Dot3+VolumeUp       increase the speech pitch
   Dot4+VolumeDown     pan the speech more to the left
   Dot4+VolumeUp       pan the speech more to the right

Legacy Bindings

   CAPTION: Legacy Operations

          Keys                        Description
   Space+Dot3          the keyboard Cursor Left key
   Space+Dot6          the keyboard Cursor Right key
   Space+Dot1          the keyboard Cursor Up key
   Space+Dot4          the keyboard Cursor Down key
   Space+Dots23        the keyboard Page Up key
   Space+Dots56        the keyboard Page Down key
   Space+Dots123       the keyboard Home key
   Space+Dots456       the keyboard End key
   Space+Dots12        the keyboard Shift+Tab keys (tab backward)
   Space+Dots45        the keyboard Tab key (tab forward)
   Space+Dots14#c      speak the current line
   VolumeDown+VolumeUp disable speech
   Dot8+PowerOn        enable one hand mode

Developer Operations

Common Actions

   CAPTION: Common Developer Operations

                  Keys                                         Description
   Forward+Backward+Dots1245+LongPress enable developer mode
   Forward+Backward+Dots1245           disable developer mode
   Space+Dots78+Dots136#u              enable the logging of screen updates
   Space+Dots78+Dots136#u+LongPress    disable the logging of screen updates
   Space+Dots78+Dots13#k               enable the logging of keyboard key events
   Space+Dots78+Dots13#k+LongPress     disable the logging of keyboard key events
   Space+Dots78+Dot1#a                 enable the logging of user-requested actions
   Space+Dots78+Dot1#a+LongPress       disable the logging of user-requested actions
   Space+Dots78+Dots1345#n             enable the logging of internal screen navigation operations
   Space+Dots78+Dots1345#n+LongPress   disable the logging of internal screen navigation operations
   Space+Dots78+Dots1245#g             enable the logging of touch screen gestures
   Space+Dots78+Dots1245#g+LongPress   disable the logging of touch screen gestures
   Space+Dots78+Dots12#b               enable the logging of braille display updates
   Space+Dots78+Dots12#b+LongPress     disable the logging of braille display updates
   Space+Dots78+Dots234#s              save the current B2G User Interface settings
   Space+Dots78+Dots1235#r             restore the most recently saved B2G User Interface settings
   Space+Dots78+Dots145#d              reset the B2G User Interface settings to default values
   Space+Dots78+Dots1346#x             force a B2G User Interface crash
   Forward+Space+Dot1                  enable the most useful logging categories
   Forward+Space+Dot2                  clear the Android log
   Forward+Space+Dot3                  send a copy of the Android log to the B2G developers
   Forward+Space+Dot7                  disable all of the logging categories

Screen Actions

   CAPTION: Screen Developer Operations

            Keys                                        Description
   Space+Dots78+Dots134#m go to the System Maintenance Operations screen of the B2G User Interface
   Backward+Dots4568      write the screen element structure to the log
   Backward+Dot4          go to and describe the parent node
   Backward+Dot5          go to and describe the previous sibling node
   Backward+Dot6          go to and describe the next sibling node
   Backward+Dot8          go to and describe the first child node
   Backward+Dots56        describe the current node
   Backward+Dots456       force the screen to scroll backward (up or left)
   Backward+Dots568       force the screen to scroll forward (down or right)
   Backward+Dots48        go to the Launcher chooser

Technical Information

     * Weight: 575g [20.3oz]
     * Dimensions:
          + Width: 20cm [8in]
          + Depth: 11cm [4.3in]
          + Height: 3cm [1.2in] (including feet and keys)
     * Braille Display: Metec, 20 cells, 8 dots per cell
     * Battery: Lithium Polymer, 4 Volt, 5.6 Amp Hours, not user accessible
     * Camera: 5MP, built-in flash
     * Wi-Fi: IEEE 802.11 b/g, Hotspot, Wi-Fi Direct
     * Bluetooth: 2.1+EDR, Power Class 1.5
          + Profiles: OPP, A2DP, AVRCP, HID
     * GPS Receiver: NAVSTAR L1C/A Band, 48 channels
     * Accelerometer: 4 axis
     * Compass
     * Internal Memory: 8.5GB eMMC, 500MB DRAM

     * SD Card Slot: 32GB max, external (on back)
     * Micro-SIM Card Slot: internal, user accessible (beneath cover on bottom)
     * Cellular Wireless Module:
          + Quad-band GSM / GPRS / EDGE: 850MHz, 900MHz, 1800MHz, 1900MHz
          + Quad-band UMTS WCDMA FDD: 800MHz, 850MHz, 1900MHz, 2100MHz
          + Dual-band CDMA EVDO Rev A: 800MHz, 1900MHz
          + GPS: 1575.42MHz

The Serial Port

   The serial port is a 10-pin male connector under The Removable Cover in the corner nearest to the Power switch. In other words, with the bottom toward you and the side with the Power switch up, the port is in the upper-right corner. In this orientation, its pins are arranged in two five-pin columns. From top to bottom:
     * The pins in the left column are numbered: 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
     * The pins in the right column are numbered: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10

   Like this:
1 o o 2
3 o o 4
5 o o 6
7 o o 8
9 o o 10

   The pins are used as follows:
   Pin Function
   2   inbound data
   3   outbound data
   5   ground

   The port is configured as follows:
   Property     Setting
   Baud         115200
   Data Bits    8
   Stop Bits    1
   Parity       none
   Flow Control software (X-ON/X-OFF)

Tables

Braille Characters

Dot Numbering

   A standard braille cell consists of six dots arranged in three rows and two columns. Each dot can be specifically identified by its number as follows:

   CAPTION: The Standard Six-dot Braille Cell

   Dot Position     Row Column Cell
   1   top-left     1   1      ⠁
   2   middle-left  2   1      ⠂
   3   bottom-left  3   1      ⠄
   4   top-right    1   2      ⠈
   5   middle-right 2   2      ⠐
   6   bottom-right 3   2      ⠠

   Computer braille has introduced two more dots in a fourth row at the bottom.

   CAPTION: Additional Dots in Computer Braille

   Dot Position    Row Column Cell
   7   below-left  4   1      ⡀
   8   below-right 4   2      ⢀

   A picture may make this numbering convention easier to understand:
1 o o 4
2 o o 5
3 o o 6
7 o o 8

Unicode Braille Characters

   Actual braille cells are represented by the 256 characters within the Unicode range U+2800 through U+28FF. Each of the eight bits within the low-order byte of this range represents a braille dot within the cell, according to ISO 11548-1, as follows:

   CAPTION: Unicode Braille Dots

   Dot Cell Hexadecimal Decimal Binary
   1   ⠁    01          1       00000001
   2   ⠂    02          2       00000010
   3   ⠄    04          4       00000100
   4   ⠈    08          8       00001000
   5   ⠐    10          16      00010000
   6   ⠠    20          32      00100000
   7   ⡀    40          64      01000000
   8   ⢀    80          128     10000000

Braille Character Map

   These tables show how English US braille is represented. This mapping is also used by locales that don't (yet) have their own.

North American Braille Computer Code

   The North American convention for how the 95 basic ASCII characters are rendered in computer (8-dot) braille.

   CAPTION: North American Braille Computer Code

   Char- Code   Bra- Dot     Character
   acter Point  ille Numbers Name
         U+0020 ⠀    no dots Space
   !     U+0021 ⠮    2346    Exclamation Point
   "     U+0022 ⠐    5       Quotation Mark (Double Quote)
   #     U+0023 ⠼    3456    Number Sign
   $     U+0024 ⠫    1246    Dollar Sign
   %     U+0025 ⠩    146     Percent Sign
   &     U+0026 ⠯    12346   Ampersand
   '     U+0027 ⠄    3       Apostrophe, Acute Accent, Single Quote
   (     U+0028 ⠷    12356   Left Parenthesis (round bracket)
   )     U+0029 ⠾    23456   Right Parenthesis (round bracket)
   *     U+002A ⠡    16      Asterisk
   +     U+002B ⠬    346     Plus Sign
   ,     U+002C ⠠    6       Comma
   -     U+002D ⠤    36      Minus, Hyphen
   .     U+002E ⠨    46      Period
   /     U+002F ⠌    34      Slash, Solidus
   0     U+0030 ⠴    356     Zero
   1     U+0031 ⠂    2       One
   2     U+0032 ⠆    23      Two
   3     U+0033 ⠒    25      Three
   4     U+0034 ⠲    256     Four
   5     U+0035 ⠢    26      Five
   6     U+0036 ⠖    235     Six
   7     U+0037 ⠶    2356    Seven
   8     U+0038 ⠦    236     Eight
   9     U+0039 ⠔    35      Nine
   :     U+003A ⠱    156     Colon
   ;     U+003B ⠰    56      Semicolon
   <     U+003C ⠣    126     Less Than Sign, Left Angle Bracket
   =     U+003D ⠿    123456  Equals Sign
   >     U+003E ⠜    345     Greater Than Sign, Right Angle Bracket
   ?     U+003F ⠹    1456    Question Mark
   @     U+0040 ⡈    47      Commercial At
   A     U+0041 ⡁    17      Uppercase A
   B     U+0042 ⡃    127     Uppercase B
   C     U+0043 ⡉    147     Uppercase C
   D     U+0044 ⡙    1457    Uppercase D
   E     U+0045 ⡑    157     Uppercase E
   F     U+0046 ⡋    1247    Uppercase F
   G     U+0047 ⡛    12457   Uppercase G
   H     U+0048 ⡓    1257    Uppercase H
   I     U+0049 ⡊    247     Uppercase I
   J     U+004A ⡚    2457    Uppercase J
   K     U+004B ⡅    137     Uppercase K
   L     U+004C ⡇    1237    Uppercase L
   M     U+004D ⡍    1347    Uppercase M
   N     U+004E ⡝    13457   Uppercase N
   O     U+004F ⡕    1357    Uppercase O
   P     U+0050 ⡏    12347   Uppercase P
   Q     U+0051 ⡟    123457  Uppercase Q
   R     U+0052 ⡗    12357   Uppercase R
   S     U+0053 ⡎    2347    Uppercase S
   T     U+0054 ⡞    23457   Uppercase T
   U     U+0055 ⡥    1367    Uppercase U
   V     U+0056 ⡧    12367   Uppercase V
   W     U+0057 ⡺    24567   Uppercase W
   X     U+0058 ⡭    13467   Uppercase X
   Y     U+0059 ⡽    134567  Uppercase Y
   Z     U+005A ⡵    13567   Uppercase Z
   [     U+005B ⡪    2467    Left Bracket (square)
   \     U+005C ⡳    12567   Backslash, Reverse Solidus
   ]     U+005D ⡻    124567  Right Bracket (square)
   ^     U+005E ⡘    457     Circumflex Accent
   _     U+005F ⠸    456     Underscore
   `     U+0060 ⠈    4       Grave Accent, Back Quote
   a     U+0061 ⠁    1       Lowercase A
   b     U+0062 ⠃    12      Lowercase B
   c     U+0063 ⠉    14      Lowercase C
   d     U+0064 ⠙    145     Lowercase D
   e     U+0065 ⠑    15      Lowercase E
   f     U+0066 ⠋    124     Lowercase F
   g     U+0067 ⠛    1245    Lowercase G
   h     U+0068 ⠓    125     Lowercase H
   i     U+0069 ⠊    24      Lowercase I
   j     U+006A ⠚    245     Lowercase J
   k     U+006B ⠅    13      Lowercase K
   l     U+006C ⠇    123     Lowercase L
   m     U+006D ⠍    134     Lowercase M
   n     U+006E ⠝    1345    Lowercase N
   o     U+006F ⠕    135     Lowercase O
   p     U+0070 ⠏    1234    Lowercase P
   q     U+0071 ⠟    12345   Lowercase Q
   r     U+0072 ⠗    1235    Lowercase R
   s     U+0073 ⠎    234     Lowercase S
   t     U+0074 ⠞    2345    Lowercase T
   u     U+0075 ⠥    136     Lowercase U
   v     U+0076 ⠧    1236    Lowercase V
   w     U+0077 ⠺    2456    Lowercase W
   x     U+0078 ⠭    1346    Lowercase X
   y     U+0079 ⠽    13456   Lowercase Y
   z     U+007A ⠵    1356    Lowercase Z
   {     U+007B ⠪    246     Left Brace (curly bracket)
   |     U+007C ⠳    1256    Vertical Bar
   }     U+007D ⠻    12456   Right Brace (curly bracket)
   ~     U+007E ⠘    45      Tilde Accent

Additional Common Symbols

   The representations of these additional symbols have been designed such that they can be relatively easily remembered. The following methods have been used:
     * Adding dot 8 to a related letter, e.g. adding dot 8 to the letter c for the copyright sign.
     * Adding dot 7 to a related punctuation symbol, e.g. adding dot 7 to the dollar sign for the cent sign.
     * The superscript digits are rendered by adding dot 7 to the representations of the corresponding regular digits.
     * The subscript digits are rendered by adding dot 8 to the representations of the corresponding regular digits.

   CAPTION: Additional Common Symbols

   Char- Code   Bra- Dot     Character
   acter Point  ille Numbers Name
   ©     U+00A9 ⢉    148     Copyright Sign
   ¶     U+00B6 ⢏    12348   Paragraph Sign, Pilcrow
   §     U+00A7 ⢎    2348    Section Sign
   ®     U+00AE ⢗    12358   Registered Sign
   ™     U+2122 ⢞    23458   Trade Mark Sign
   °     U+00B0 ⢙    1458    Degree Sign, Greek Theta
   µ     U+00B5 ⢍    1348    Micro Sign, Greek Mu
   ¬     U+00AC ⢝    13458   Not Sign
   €     U+20AC ⢑    158     Euro Sign
   ¥     U+00A5 ⢽    134568  Yen Sign
   £     U+00A3 ⡼    34567   Pound Sign
   ¢     U+00A2 ⡫    12467   Cent Sign
   ·     U+00B7 ⡨    467     Middle Dot, Bullet
   «     U+00AB ⡷    123567  Left-pointing Double Angle Quotation Mark
   »     U+00BB ⡾    234567  Right-pointing Double Angle Quotation Mark
   ±     U+00B1 ⡬    3467    Plus-Minus Sign
   ×     U+00D7 ⡡    167     Multiplication Sign
   ÷     U+00F7 ⡌    347     Division Sign
   ≠     U+2260 ⡿    1234567 Not-Equal-To Sign
   ≤     U+2264 ⡜    3457    Less-Than-Or-Equal-To Sign
   ≥     U+2265 ⡣    1267    Greater-Than-Or-Equal-To Sign
   ⁰     U+2070 ⡴    3567    Superscript Zero
   ¹     U+00B9 ⡂    27      Superscript One
   ²     U+00B2 ⡆    237     Superscript Two
   ³     U+00B3 ⡒    257     Superscript Three
   ⁴     U+2074 ⡲    2567    Superscript Four
   ⁵     U+2075 ⡢    267     Superscript Five
   ⁶     U+2076 ⡖    2357    Superscript Six
   ⁷     U+2077 ⡶    23567   Superscript Seven
   ⁸     U+2078 ⡦    2367    Superscript Eight
   ⁹     U+2079 ⡔    357     Superscript Nine
   ₀     U+2080 ⢴    3568    Subscript Zero
   ₁     U+2081 ⢂    28      Subscript One
   ₂     U+2082 ⢆    238     Subscript Two
   ₃     U+2083 ⢒    258     Subscript Three
   ₄     U+2084 ⢲    2568    Subscript Four
   ₅     U+2085 ⢢    268     Subscript Five
   ₆     U+2086 ⢖    2358    Subscript Six
   ₇     U+2087 ⢶    23568   Subscript Seven
   ₈     U+2088 ⢦    2368    Subscript Eight
   ₉     U+2089 ⢔    358     Subscript Nine

Additional Characters for Spanish

   The representations of these Spanish characters have been designed such that they can be easily recognized. The following methods have been used:
     * The lowercase accented letters are rendered by adding dot 8 to their six-dot Spanish literary braille representations.
     * The uppercase accented letters are rendered by adding dots 7 and 8 to their six-dot Spanish literary braille representations.
     * The inverted punctuation symbols are rendered by adding dot 7 to the representations of the associated North American Braille Computer Code punctuation symbols.

   CAPTION: Additional Characters for Spanish

   Char- Code   Bra- Dot     Character
   acter Point  ille Numbers Name
   á     U+00E1 ⢷    123568  Lowercase A with Acute
   é     U+00E9 ⢮    23468   Lowercase E with Acute
   í     U+00ED ⢌    348     Lowercase I with Acute
   ó     U+00F3 ⢬    3468    Lowercase O with Acute
   ú     U+00FA ⢾    234568  Lowercase U with Acute
   ë     U+00EB ⢫    12468   Lowercase E with Diaeresis
   ü     U+00FC ⢳    12568   Lowercase U with Diaeresis
   ñ     U+00F1 ⢻    124568  Lowercase N with Tilde
   Á     U+00C1 ⣷    1235678 Uppercase A with Acute
   É     U+00C9 ⣮    234678  Uppercase E with Acute
   Í     U+00CD ⣌    3478    Uppercase I with Acute
   Ó     U+00D3 ⣬    34678   Uppercase O with Acute
   Ú     U+00DA ⣾    2345678 Uppercase U with Acute
   Ë     U+00CB ⣫    124678  Uppercase E with Diaeresis
   Ü     U+00DC ⣳    125678  Uppercase U with Diaeresis
   Ñ     U+00D1 ⣻    1245678 Uppercase N with Tilde
   ¡     U+00A1 ⡮    23467   Inverted Exclamation Point
   ¿     U+00BF ⡹    14567   Inverted Question Mark

ASCII Control Characters

   To type a control character, press Space+x (dots 1346) immediately before any of these characters:

   CAPTION: ASCII Control Characters

   Char- Code   Bra- Dot     Mne-
   acter Point  ille Numbers monic Meaning
   `     U+0000 ⠈    4       NUL   Null Character
   a     U+0001 ⠁    1       SOH   Start of Heading
   b     U+0002 ⠃    12      STX   Start of Text
   c     U+0003 ⠉    14      ETX   End of Text
   d     U+0004 ⠙    145     EOT   End of Transmission
   e     U+0005 ⠑    15      ENQ   Enquiry
   f     U+0006 ⠋    124     ACK   Acknowledge
   g     U+0007 ⠛    1245    BEL   Bell
   h     U+0008 ⠓    125     BS    Backspace
   i     U+0009 ⠊    24      HT    Horizontal Tab
   j     U+000A ⠚    245     LF    Line Feed (NL, New Line)
   k     U+000B ⠅    13      VT    Vertical Tab
   l     U+000C ⠇    123     FF    Form Feed (NP, New Page)
   m     U+000D ⠍    134     CR    Carriage Return
   n     U+000E ⠝    1345    SO    Shift Out
   o     U+000F ⠕    135     SI    Shift In
   p     U+0010 ⠏    1234    DLE   Data Link Escape
   q     U+0011 ⠟    12345   DC1   Device Control 1 (X-On)
   r     U+0012 ⠗    1235    DC2   Device Control 2
   s     U+0013 ⠎    234     DC3   Device Control 3 (X-Off)
   t     U+0014 ⠞    2345    DC4   Device Control 4
   u     U+0015 ⠥    136     NAK   Negative Acknowledge
   v     U+0016 ⠧    1236    SYN   Synchronous Idle
   w     U+0017 ⠺    2456    ETB   End of Transmission Block
   x     U+0018 ⠭    1346    CAN   Cancel
   y     U+0019 ⠽    13456   EM    End of Medium
   z     U+001A ⠵    1356    SUB   Substitute
   {     U+001B ⠪    246     ESC   Escape
   |     U+001C ⠳    1256    FS    Field Separator
   }     U+001D ⠻    12456   GS    Group Separator
   ~     U+001E ⠘    45      RS    Record Separator
   _     U+001F ⠸    456     US    Unit Separator
   ?     U+007F ⠹    1456    DEL   Delete
